[docs] Add initial ChiselTest migration doc (#3870)
chipsalliance/chisel: docs/src/appendix/migrating-from-chiseltest.md

class MyModuleSpec extends AnyFlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
  behavior of "MyModule"
  it should "do something" in {
    test(new MyModule) { c =>
      c.io.in.poke(0.U)
      c.clock.step()
      c.io.out.expect(0.U)
      c.io.in.poke(42.U)
      c.clock.step()
      c.io.out.expect(42.U)
      println("Last output value : " + c.io.out.peek().litValue)
    }
  }
}
```

This can be rewritten using ChiselSim as follows:
```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
import chisel3.simulator.EphemeralSimulator._
import org.scalatest.flatspec.AnyFlatSpec

class MyModuleSpec extends AnyFlatSpec {
  behavior of "MyModule"
  it should "do something" in {
    simulate(new MyModule) { c =>
      c.io.in.poke(0.U)
      c.clock.step()
      c.io.out.expect(0.U)
      c.io.in.poke(42.U)
      c.clock.step()
      c.io.out.expect(42.U)
      println("Last output value : " + c.io.out.peek().litValue)
    }
  }
}
```

For both ChiselTest and ChiselSim, you will typically run this with `sbt test` or some way of running tests.
The output from ChiselSim will look something like the following:

```scala mdoc
// This is how one can run a ScalaTest Spec manually, typically one would use "sbt test"

> org.scalatest.nocolor.run(new MyModuleSpec)

Reviewer: @jackkoenig Not sure if you saw on the deployed page (https://www.chisel-lang.org/docs/appendix/migrating-from-chiseltest), but this is currently failing with:

```
// MdocSession$MdocApp$MyModuleSpec:
// MyModule
// - should do something *** FAILED ***
//   java.lang.Exception: verilator not found on the PATH!
...
```

Author: Lol I did not see that, thank you for letting me know!

```

> ChiselSim also does not currently have any support for `fork`-`join`, so any tests using those constructs will need to be rewritten in a single-threaded manner.

Reviewer: It feels like this could be the start of a new section, called something like "Missing Features", which details all of the ChiselTest features that aren't yet supported. We should probably give a plan for each one: is it going to be supported in the future? Should it be replaced with a different style of code?

Author: Yeah that could be a useful section. For things with different style, I think they get larger sections since you'll want the code example for "before" and "after". But yeah having a plan and giving pointers would be useful since perhaps people will want to contribute to some of these. For example, formal verification needs more work on CIRCT but maybe with a pointer some people could contribute.

Author: In any case, I think I'll get this merged to have something to point to and then we should continue iterating on this doc.

---
title: "Migrating from ChiselTest"
sidebar_position: 0
---

# Migrating from ChiselTest to ChiselSim

## Background

With the release of Chisel 5, Chisel moved off of the legacy [Scala FIRRTL Compiler](https://github.com/chipsalliance/firrtl) to the MLIR FIRRTL Compiler (part of the [llvm/circt](https://github.com/llvm/circt) project).
This change in underlying compiler technology has been a crucial piece in enabling the addition of many new features to Chisel, including linear-temporal logic (LTL) properties, Probes, and Layers.

> Unfortunately, Chisel 3's testing library, [ChiselTest](https://github.com/ucb-bar/chiseltest), is built around the SFC, making it difficult to support ChiselTest in Chisel 5 and beyond.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, Chisel 3's testing library, [ChiselTest](https://github.com/ucb-bar/chiseltest), is built around the SFC, making it difficult to support ChiselTest in Chisel 5 and beyond.
_ChiselTest is not used or maintained by the core Chisel development team or their employers._
```

> This is not a fundamental problem, it is one of engineering resources.

Reviewer 2: I would just strike this and pivot to talking about ChiselSim:

```suggestion
ChiselSim is the approved replacement for ChiselTest in Chisel 5 and beyond.
ChiselSim is maintained and used by the core Chisel development team.
```

Reviewer: I also was looking for a change to this line, and I like this a lot 👍

> This page is intended to serve as a living document to help Chisel users migrate from ChiselTest to Chisel's native simulation library, ChiselSim.

Reviewer 2: Stronger language:

```suggestion
This page describes how to migrate from ChiselTest to ChiselSim.
```

> This page is intended to serve as a living document to help Chisel 3 users migrate from ChiselTest to Chisel's native simulation library, ChiselSim.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This page is intended to serve as a living document to help Chisel users migrate from ChiselTest to Chisel's native simulation library, ChiselSim.
```

> This page is intended to serve as a living document to help Chisel 3 users migrate from ChiselTest to Chisel's native simulation library, ChiselSim.

Reviewer 3: Does ChiselSim exist? This was renamed to `svsim`, I'm not sure what ChiselSim is other than some specific implementations of svsim...?

Author: SVSim is the underlying execution engine, but the user-facing API is `chisel3.simulator` (ChiselSim). Also, the future arcilator will not work with SVSim (because SVSim is intentionally closely tied to simulating SystemVerilog), so we will need a different execution engine for it, but it should still be targeted by the higher-level "ChiselSim" API.

## Getting Started

> The developer's of ChiselTest have maintained some amount of compatibility between ChiselTest and newer versions of Chisel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The developers of ChiselTest have maintained some amount of compatibility between ChiselTest and newer versions of Chisel.
```

> This relies on a forked version of the old SFC so there may be compatibility issues, but it does provide some versions of feature overlap for users to migrate their code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This relies on a forked version of the SFC.
Use of ChiselTest with Chisel 6 or later will prevent the usage of new Chisel 6 features.
It is not expected that new versions of Chisel will be compatible with the SFC.
```

We recommend using the latest minor version of Chisel 5 and ChiselTest 5 for migrating. At the time of writing this is Chisel v5.1.0 and ChiselTest v5.0.2, but please check for later versions.

## Migration

ChiselSim provides a minimal `peek`, `poke`, `expect`, and `step` API, similar to that of ChiselTest.
You use ChiselSim by importing it `import chisel3.simulator.EphemeralSimulator._`, and using its `simulate` method which is similar to ChiselTest's `test`.
At present, it does not have any integration with ScalaTest, so users should use any ScalaTest APIs directly.

For example, given a simple design (typically in `src/main/scala`):

```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
class MyModule extends Module {
  val io = IO(new Bundle {
    val in = Input(UInt(16.W))
    val out = Output(UInt(16.W))
  })

  io.out := RegNext(io.in)
}
```

> The canonical way to test this would be with a `ChiselScalatestTester` in `src/test/scala`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The legacy ChiselTest way to test this would be with a `ChiselScalatestTester` in `src/test/scala`:
```

<!-- This cannot be mdoc because we do not compile against chiseltest -->
```scala
import chisel3._
import chiseltest._
import org.scalatest.flatspec.AnyFlatSpec

class MyModuleSpec extends AnyFlatSpec with ChiselScalatestTester {
  behavior of "MyModule"
  it should "do something" in {
    test(new MyModule) { c =>
      c.io.in.poke(0.U)
      c.clock.step()
      c.io.out.expect(0.U)
      c.io.in.poke(42.U)
      c.clock.step()
      c.io.out.expect(42.U)
      println("Last output value : " + c.io.out.peek().litValue)
    }
  }
}
```

This can be rewritten using ChiselSim as follows:
```scala mdoc:silent
import chisel3._
import chisel3.simulator.EphemeralSimulator._
import org.scalatest.flatspec.AnyFlatSpec

class MyModuleSpec extends AnyFlatSpec {
  behavior of "MyModule"
  it should "do something" in {
    simulate(new MyModule) { c =>
      c.io.in.poke(0.U)
      c.clock.step()
      c.io.out.expect(0.U)
      c.io.in.poke(42.U)
      c.clock.step()
      c.io.out.expect(42.U)
      println("Last output value : " + c.io.out.peek().litValue)
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: It is great that the APIs here are so similar. 👍  This goes a long way towards showing that some migrations may be relatively painless.
